6.S081/6.828 2019 Lecture 4: System Call Entry/Exit

Today: how system calls get into / out of the kernel
  the start of some detailed investigation of O/S internals

What happens when a program calls write(fd, buf, n)?
  [user/kernel diagram]
  could we use an ordinary function call into the kernel?
  that would be fast
  and flexible -- easy to e.g. pass and return complex data types
  and a mechanism familiar to programmers

Can't use function call for system call!
  Due to the need for isolation.
  Isolation looms over much of O/S design.

What is isolation?
  enforced separation to contain effects of failures
  the process is the usual unit of isolation
  prevent process X from wrecking or spying on process Y
    r/w memory, use 100% of CPU, change FDs, &c
  prevent a process from interfering with the operating system 
  in the face of malice as well as bugs
    a bad process may try to trick the h/w or kernel

the main isolation tools
  address spaces
    a process address only its own memory (not kernel, not other processes)
    [user address space: 0..trapframe+trampoline]
  privilege mode in CPU hardware
    prevents a process from accessing devices and sensitive CPU register
    e.g. address space configuration registers
  syscall implementations explicitly enforce controls
  careful user/kernel transfer (today)

CPU privilege mode
  on RISC-V: supervisor mode vs user mode
  supervisor mode can do many things that user mode cannot
    access devices
    configure address spaces (virtual memory)
    read/write special registers
  the kernel runs in supervisor mode
  ordinary programs run in user mode
  every serious microprocessor has a similar user/kernel mode flag

let's look at how xv6 system calls enter/leave the kernel
  example: the shell printing a prompt with write(2, "$ ", 2)
  [sh.c's write(2, "$ ", 2); emacs kernel/usys.S]
  that's a C function call to write in usys.S
  note the ecall instruction!

the overall trajectory
  write()
    trampoline / uservec
      usertrap() in trap.c
        syscall() in syscall.c
          sys_write() in sysfile.c
      usertrapret()
    trampoline / userret
  write()

what's the state of the machine at this point?
  user address space, kernel address space
  trampoline at top of user address space
  trapframe just under the trampoline
  kernel stack for shell in the kernel

trapframe content, set up in advance by kernel
  [on board]
  see proc.h
  kernel page table
  kernel stack pointer
  address of usertrap() function in kernel
  space for saved user pc
  space for 32 saved user registers

special RISC-V registers (many more, here are relevant ones)
  Chapter 10 in The RISC-V Reader
  [on board]
  stvec -- ecall jumps here in kernel; address of trampoline
  sepc -- ecall saves user pc here
  scause -- ecall sets to 8 to indicate a system call
  sscratch -- address of trapframe
  satp -- current page table

C function calling convention on RISC-V
  i.e. how function calls use the 32 RISC-V registers
  important since system calls start as C function calls
    e.g. shell's call to write()
  a0..a7 -- arguments
  ra -- return address
  a0 -- return value

Now I'll walk through the system call entry with the gdb debugger.
  sh.asm says that write() function is at address 0xd68
  let's start there

$ make qemu-gdb
(gdb) b *0xd68 -- write() in the shell
(gdb) c
(gdb) delete 1

the "li a7, 16" tells the kernel which system call
  SYS_write is 16
  kernel code will eventually check user's register a7
let's look at the registers

(gdb) info reg

$sp is a low address -- user memory starts at zero
write() arguments: a0 is fd, a1 is buf, a2 is n

(gdb) x/1c $a1

the shell is printing the $ prompt

(gdb) stepi

the ecall instruction is going to switch to kernel mode!

(gdb) stepi

we're now in kernel mode.
ecall did three things:
  jump to $stvec (i.e. set $pc to $stvec)
  save $pc in $sepc
  change mode from user to supervisor -- we can't see this

(gdb) print/x $pc
(gdb) print/x $stvec

the kernel earlier set up $stvec

(gdb) print/x $sepc

the hardware saves $pc since it overwrites it
again, all registers but $pc still have precious user values

(gdb) info reg

note: ecall lets a user program switch to privileged supervisor mode
  but it does *let* let the user program control what instructions
    are executed in that mode.
  ecall always jumps to $stvec, which only can be written in
    supervisor mode (not by user programs), and which the
    kernel carefully set up to a known entry point (trampoline).

can we jump to kernel C functions at this point?
no:
  need to switch to kernel address space
  need to save all 32 registers
    they still hold user values
    but kernel code will use (overwrite) the registers
  need to make $sp to point to top of kernel stack
why didn't RISC-V design have ecall do all these things automatically?

how to save the 32 user registers?
  we want to store them in the trapframe
  but a store instruction needs an address, which must be in a register.
  where to get the address?
  what register to put it in, given that all 32 hold user values?
the answer:
  RISC-V has a special sscratch register, previously set by the kernel.
  kernel set sscratch to the address of the trapframe.
  csrrw instruction can exchange a register and sscratch

we are now executing uservec in kernel/trampoline.S
  the purpose of trampoline.S is to hold the machine code needed to set up for C
uservec starts with csrrw a0, sscratch, a0
saves user a0 in sscratch
causes a0 to point to trapframe for saving user registers
gdb has already executed this instruction (I don't know why)

(gdb) print/x $a0 -- now points to trapframe in kernel
(gdb) print/x $sscratch -- now holds saved user a0

now there are 32 saves of user registers to the trapframe, via a0
  so they can be restored when the system call returns
  let's skip them

(gdb) b *0x3ffffff076
(gdb) c

now we're setting up to be able to run C code in the kernel
first a stack
  previously, kernel put a pointer to top of this process's
    kernel stack in trapframe
  "ld sp, 8(a0)" fetches it
  remember a0 points to the trapframe
  at this point the only kernel object the code knows how to
    get at is the trapframe, so everything has to be loaded from there.

(gdb) stepi

retrieve a pointer to info about the current process, from trapframe, into tp

(gdb) stepi

we want to jump to the kernel C function usertrap(), which
  the kernel previously saved in the trapframe.
  "ld t0, 16(a0)" fetches it into t0, we'll use it in a moment

(gdb) stepi

we are still running in an address space set up for the user program
address spaces are configured using page tables, which the CPU knows about
we need to tell the CPU to switch to the kernel page table / address space
again, previously the kernel stashed a page table pointer in the trapframe
we'll load the page table pointer into t1
(more on page tables &c next lecture)

(gdb) stepi
(gdb) stepi

the csrw satp, t1 actually installs the kernel page table
now we can directly get at all kernel data and instructions

(gdb) stepi

the jr t0 is a jump to usertrap() (using t0 retrieved from trapframe)

(gdb) stepi

we're now in usertrap() in kernel/trap.c
  various traps come here, e.g. errors, device interrupts, and system calls
  it looks in the scause register to see that the trap is a sys call
    see Figure 10.3 on page 102 of The RISC-V Reader
  cause 8 is a system call

(gdb) next ... until syscall()
(gdb) step

now we're in syscall() kernel/syscall.c
it retrieves the system call number from saved register a7 (remember?)
  p->tf points to the trapframe, with saved registers
  p->tf->a7 holds 16, SYS_write
  p->tf->a0 holds write() first argument -- fd
  p->tf->a1 holds buf
  p->tf->a2 holds n

(gdb) next ...
(gdb) print num

then dispatches through syscall[num], a table of functions

(gdb) next ...
(gdb) step

aha, we're in sys_write
at this point system call implementations are fairly ordinary C code
let's skip to the end, to see how a system call returns to user code

(gdb) finish

notice that write() produced console output (the shell's $ prompt)
back to syscall()
the p->tf->a0 assignment puts the sys call return value in user a0
  will be restored later
  the C calling convention on RISC-V puts return values in a0

(gdb) print ret

write() returned 2 -- two characters -- $ and space

(gdb) finish

back to usertrap()

(gdb) next
(gdb) step

now we're in usertrapret(), which starts the process of returning
  to the user program
at the end, we'll use the RISC-V sret instruction
  but we need to prepare a few registers that sret uses
  sepc (user program counter)
  sstatus (the "previous mode" bit)
before sret we need to prepare for the next system call
  set up trapframe and s* registers
and we need to restore the user environment
  restore user registers
  switch to user address space
code in usertrapret():
  the w_stvec(TRAMPOLINE ...) causes ecall to jump to uservec (as we've seen)
  the assignments to p->tf->... set up values the trampoline code will need
    e.g. the address of the top of the kernel stack
  the sstatus code will cause sret to return to user (non-privileged) mode
  the w_sepc tells sret what user pc to resume at
  ends with jump to userret in trampoline.S

(gdb) b *0x3ffffff090
(gdb) c

the csrw satp switches to the user address space

(gdb) stepi
(gdb) stepi
(gdb) stepi

the csrw scratch puts the user a0 into sscratch
  just before sret we'll do a swap,
  so that a0 holds the user a0 and sscratch holds trapframe pointer.
  which is what uservec expects.

now lots of loads from the trapframe into registers
  these restore the user registers

(gdb) b *0x3ffffff10a

here's the csrw that swaps a0 with sscratch

(gdb) print/x $a0 -- the return value from write()
(gdb) print/x $sscratch -- trapframe address for uservec

now we're at the sret instruction

(gdb) stepi

now we're back in the user program (pc = 0xd6e)
  returning 2 from the write() function

(gdb) print/x $a0

and we're done!

summary
  system call entry/exit is far more complex than function call
  design is driven by the need for isolation
  you should ask yourself whether all this complexity is needed
    what other designs might be possible?
  next lecture: address spaces, page tables, virtual memory
